cool cool man so
i see you have a shirt that says your
name on i mean sorry uh
a hat yeah simple my mom made it i got a
i went bald recently for content and um
it was not a very good look so i'm a hat
guy now
you went bald for content what does that
mean
i was doing uh marbles do you know what
marbles is
nope it's like this thing where you can
have
some random marble win it's just
completely luck based
and one of the marbles was give myself a
haircut it was getting out of hand
quarantine and um i tried to do a
haircut
i did but it was going really bad so i
was like i'm gonna just cut it all off
so i ended up going bald it wasn't good
so it wasn't molding no i wasn't malden
i was probably kind of mauled in by the
end of it because then i was bald
but cool it wasn't yeah and do you
normally do your speed runs without a
shirt on
ah yeah people were asking if you were
going to have a shirt and i
i got a little bit scared
because i don't really know what i'm
getting myself into before i interview
someone
yeah but uh it just kind of became a
meme
i had like this reward i might on my
channel where you could have me take my
shirt off and then another reward where
you can have me put it back on people
would always just take it off so i was
just off a lot
and yeah it just happened while i had
world record and now everyone thinks i'm
just never wear a shirt
cool well i'm i mean i i feel a little
bit more comfortable with you wearing
your shirt today
i'm glad you're also wearing a shirt yep
and uh
you know i don't know about you but i'm
naked from the from below the waist
yeah because that's always that's the
advantage of
coving and you gotta let them breathe
got a lot of breathing
um and so you're uh you're a speed
runner for mario 64.
yeah one of my favorite games of all
time
it's a good game they they knocked it
out of the park
yeah they really did any um and so
how i mean help me understand like when
you're a speed runner for a game like
is that something that you do on a daily
basis or yeah
yeah so it's basically a grind like for
months at a time i mean i
started playing you take a lot of breaks
like i've gotten a lot of burnout but i
started playing the game in 2012
on and off since then so for the past
eight years and
for the past it's been about nine months
now
nine ten months i've been pretty much
playing it almost every day
and just trying to lower my time and
like a typical stream is just
restarting over and over for like
upwards of six eight hours and just
trying to beat your best run
interesting and what is the record
i currently hold the record with 138 28
of doing
all the stars but there's different
categories there's like beat the game
with no stars beat the game with like 16
stars
so there's different categories some of
them are like memes that people don't
really care that much about and then
some of them are like
very competitive a lot of people run
them and are trying to get the record
cool so you hold the record for 120
stars and
and mario 64. yeah shortest amount wow
yeah one hour and 38 minutes
and 28 seconds wow that's crazy
it's pretty fast yeah i mean i can't
even imagine
i've seen some speed runs of of mario 64
where they like bug the game out
is that like common or
yeah that's more common for the shorter
categories but for 120 star there's
actually not that much
like glitching that you do there's a
couple things here and there but most of
it's just
moving really fast like the mechanics of
the game are really good
so it's mostly just legit just moving
quick
cool and and when do you decide when
you're done
how do you figure that out when you're
done as in like when to restart
no like when you're done with this
endeavor in your life
that's i mean that's kind of where i'm
at right now because like the goal for
the past eight years was
get the world record it was like it was
kind of haunted me for a while
i was like because i got very close to
getting the record multiple times in the
past i
i was like number three or number four
and i was able to get the record but i'd
never sealed the deal
and it was only until recently that i
got it for the first time and that was
like my that felt like my i guess
dharma i don't know it felt like my
grand goal like i had to do it
and and if i couldn't do it then i was
like a failure or something like i
wouldn't be able to
do anything else if i put my mind to it
i would fail like i did with this but
now i have it and now i'm like i do want
to keep playing and push the time lower
but i'm struggling to find
that same meaning or that same passion
that i had
before getting the record makes sense
and
is that what we're talking about today
uh yeah that's part of what i want to
talk about today like dharma
that kind of thing yeah what else do you
want to talk about when you say it's
part
what else uh changing
undesirable traits through meditation
like what that process looks like okay
and
um probably flow state i'd like to talk
about that a bit
okay we can do all of those things
anything else i think that'll probably
cover
yeah i'll probably cover most of it and
um am i calling you simply
or would you like me to call you
something else you can call me ryan
ryan okay is that a randomly generated
name from
one of the little marbles or is that
ryan yeah yeah
okay so what do you want to start with
dharma changing undesirable
states i mean traits are flow states
uh i think we should start with dharma
that's kind of what we're on right now
okay
tell me what what's your understanding
of dharma
my understanding of dharma is it's your
it's like
what will give you life or like what
your passion is like what you want to do
what you feel like you should be doing
just kind of your duty like
your natural thing you'll gravitate
towards what feels the best to do
like most pure kind of thing
so yeah like your meaning what gives you
a lot of meaning like feeling connected
okay so the first thing that i want to
point out is that you tossed out a bunch
of things that are all very different
okay right so what you should do
and what you want to do
are very different yeah so i i think
i think you have an understanding of
dharma i don't mean to say that you
don't understand it
what i'm pointing out is that when we
define the term the first thing is like
what you want to do what feels the best
to do what you gravitate towards
what makes you feel connected and what
you should do can actually all be
different things
that's true and so this is the first
thing that's tricky about dharma is like
which one of these
is it i think you're close to it
so okay so i just want to point that out
right so those are all different things
and
and it sounds like to me like you have a
good sense of what it truly means
because
you're kind of approaching dharma from a
lot of different
angles what i want to do what feels good
um and so what do you believe
your tatarma is
well about like the nine months ago when
i started grinding once again
uh about a month into the grind i was in
masters i was at getting my master's
degree going
for computer science and then i just had
like a very deep
feeling inside that i had never had
before in my life that was like
basically
telling me okay you have to you have to
like drop out and just go full time with
mario
and i was like wow it just felt it it
just felt right i was like
this is what i have to do and then i
talked to my parents about that they
were like whatever you know they're not
not the happiest about it but they're
pretty supportive parents
wow and so that at that moment it felt
like my dharma was like full-time
streaming and doing speed running to get
the record that's kind of
where i was at and yeah
that's pretty much it and and how did
you feel
grinding grinding it out
uh there's a lot of days where i felt
really good like some full days of just
absolute joy feeling like really really
connected
uh with my with my chat with my
community and just with myself like i
felt very
in tune i guess might be the word just
very good
and then there was weeks where
i was playing really bad like getting
nothing going at all
and i felt really down and i felt like i
was in a really weird spot because i
dropped out
to pursue this you know kind of dream
and it wasn't going well
and i was like it felt almost like my
dharma got corrupted because
i i feel like i lost sight like normally
it was like playing because i liked the
game
and then it turned into okay i need to
play good
so i can get like my viewers so i can
still have the stream running because
like if you're playing really bad
and you're just not in the best mood
obviously people don't really care to
watch you know
like part of being a speedrunner is
you're gonna get viewers based off like
how good you're playing are you on a run
because people like to come in when
somebody's on a run and there's like
full days where you don't get anywhere
you're just resetting
in the beginning okay
and so how did your dharma get corrupted
i think it's a good way to put it
what it was just
things that i ran into while like going
for
the dharma i guess yeah i was i noticed
i started caring a lot more about
viewers and like watching that
and yeah that kind of thing because i
knew you know
this is only sustainable as long as i
can like keep
viewers or keep getting money because i
need to pay rent or whatever
and so i started worrying more about
those things and it kind of
didn't allow me to feel like comfortable
like i just always had that fear in the
back of my head so i was unable to
i felt like i couldn't hit a flow state
at all because i was always thinking
about those kind of things
yep and i know that's when i would play
the best it's like when i'm actually
having fun i just like stopped having
fun
so what's your understanding of how
thinking about viewership corrupts your
dharma
uh what do you mean so how does that
work
like so you're you're suggesting to us a
couple of observations one is that
you had this you know calling deep
within your chest that was like drop out
of your master's play
program and play super mario 64. yeah
all day every day
and you did that for a little while and
you felt fulfilled you were entering
flow states it felt like it was the
right thing to do
um you were you were in tune as you put
it which is such a great way to put it
and then things started to not go well
i'm not entirely clear what's we know
what came first but then your dharma
became corrupted
and what it feels like it got corrupted
by is you started thinking about viewers
you started thinking about making your
rent
you started thinking about things being
sustainable or unsustainable
yeah and then you were in a dark place
so how does
how do those thoughts corrupt your
dharma like what is the mechanism there
um i'm not really sure
okay so we're we'll explain that okay
okay so
the first question before that happened
what was your mind focused on
just mario like extreme was doing fine
so i was like okay i'm just
focusing on mario like i don't know it
feels kind of momentum based a lot i
think
life in general just momentum is a word
i find myself using a lot to describe
how things go on
for and i feel like it can destroy a lot
of things well and
in speed running like you can have a
good week
where like you're playing good bad above
flow state whatever you're just
popping off and then i think there's
like some weird thing that happens where
you start to expect that
and then maybe you have one bad day and
then that's the beginning of the ball
and then the momentum just picks up and
then it's not just a bad day it's like
two bad days and it's like oh my god i'm
not i'm not good anymore i can't play
anymore like people don't want to watch
so i don't know if it if it's like a
switch to viewers right away i think
it's like a gradual thing
okay so it's almost like there's a
momentum with the badness and the
momentum with the goodness
yeah so ryan let me ask you a couple
questions first
so are you i i'm finding
the desire to teach do you are you
looking more
for me to explore things with you or to
teach you
things um
i'm down for either one okay so i think
what i would like to do is i think your
your the description of your experience
is wonderful so i think you've stumbled
upon a couple of really really key
concepts and when i ask you
how does dharma get corrupted so here's
what you're giving me
i had dharma this is what it felt like
it came from somewhere i dropped out of
my master's program then my dharma got
corrupted and i noticed these thoughts
and then i ask you how does dharma get
corrupted i ask you to tell me the
principle
behind your observation and you're not
quite able to describe it
which is perfectly fine so then what i
feel like i should do is i should take
your observations which are
spot on and try to give you the equation
that
governs your observations
okay does that make sense yeah so i'd
like to teach you
how dharma gets corrupted okay how
momentum works
because wouldn't it be cool if you
understood how to make
momentum that would be pretty dope yeah
so we're going to talk about that
and also to understand that momentum
goes both ways right you can have a
negative momentum and you can have a
positive momentum
and so what we understand is people
because no one teaches this stuff is
like we observe that there's momentum
but we like don't understand if i asked
you
ryan where does momentum come from
it's like i mean little by little like a
little thing
you do laundry and then that's building
up a little bit of momentum and then
you're like okay
i can i can take care of a chore maybe i
can do like
something okay just mario yeah so so
we'll talk about that
so the first thing that i i want to
point out to people is that
you know when when ryan when you talk
about mario and being living your dharma
you're not how much are you thinking
about the world
record when you feel in tune with your
dharma
not at all explain that to us
i mean when like when i'm actually
playing like
yeah i'm playing well or whatever like
i'm in the middle of a run
i i guess you just get stung so much as
a runner where you make a mistake and
lose the run that you learn that you
can't really get attached and you can't
think about oh this is the one this will
be the one this is the record
because i mean that'll probably mess you
up you'll get psyched out and then
it's just inefficient because if you do
reset then you're going to be like hurt
and then playing when you're hurt sucks
you're just not so so what
what causes the hurt where is the heart
born
expectation beautiful right so i want
you guys to really listen to what ryan
is saying
this is a guy who quit his master's
degree to beat the world record
and my question to him is how much do
you think about the world record when
you play and he says
not at all which sounds huh
ideally you're not thinking about it at
all yeah right so like which sounds
bizarre like that sounds contradictory
but i think
the reason that ryan has beat the world
record is because he understands this
stuff pretty well and to understand that
like
so here's how i'll explain it
so when you're doing your dharma you're
not actually thinking about an
outcome you're focused on the task so
what what ryan fell in love with is
mario
and like he had set sort of the world
record is almost like an arbitrary goal
because your mind needs something to
move towards
but generally speaking when you wake up
and you stream you're trying your best
not to think about viewers not to think
about your time you're just devoting
yourself to the task at hand
so an analogy that i oftentimes use is
like one from
medicine right so like in medicine like
you train a lot and you work a lot
but at the end of the day like you can't
save a life
it's just not something you can do so
whenever you're you're a doctor and
let's say you go to the hospital to do
your job you've prepared
to be in the moment and you have a
dharma to you have a duty to save lives
but you actually can't do it which
sounds bizarre
and and you know the best doctors are
the ones who just give it their all and
that's really the most that you can do
and it's the ones who create
expectations
that first of all tend to do a worse job
and also
actually i don't know if that's true
they suffer more for sure
but i think it's it's interesting
because if you really like listen to
ryan it's like very bizarre to hear the
guys
who holds the world record for 120 stars
in mario 64 to say when you think when
you play the game what do you
do you think about the record and he's
like i try not to but that is what what
i've heard
time and time and time again for people
who pursue their dharma
right if we you know you can take your
pick of
whoever so when i think about my dharma
like i just show up
and whether the dude has a shirt or
doesn't have a shirt or whatever
right i can't like be expecting certain
things and when i expect certain things
it tends to get worse so what i really
try to do is i show up and i tell myself
every day that i stream that
you know i hope people watch it's great
if people watch i'm here for people to
watch but at the end of the day
i'm going to talk to you ryan for like
an hour and a half and
i'm going to try to help you and that's
what i devote myself to
so i want to use this word which we we
which we don't really use very much in
the west nowadays because it has
religious connotations
but devotion so when we think about
devotion we think about like religion
but what i hear from you ryan is that
you devoted yourself
to the task of mario does that make
sense
yeah and so there's something subtly
lacking
ego there it's actually not about you
it's about the purity of mario
does that make sense so you're smiling
so what what
feels like that's resonating with you
can you tell us about that
the game is good and it's just like it's
done so much for me
as a person and so that's definitely
what it is about is like just for mario
to be able to push it further and like
see where the game can go
yeah right so i want you guys to pay
attention so
are you talking in first person second
person or third person
um that third person
i think absolutely which is strange
right so we we'd expect
a speed runner to talk in the first
person
about mario i really enjoy the game i
want to do the best i want to hold the
world record
but the interesting thing is that i
would venture that your dharma gets
corrupted
when you start thinking in the first
person yeah
definitely so when you say yeah
definitely can you give us an example
i mean and this this will link to
something else like changing
undesirable traits but for a long time i
was in like the shadow
it felt like of the other runners that
held the record
and when i was in those modes of
operation like
seeing them get good runs or seeing them
like get more viewers or like do better
than me
would just make things worse because i
would like compare myself
and kind of feel guilty and feel like
jealous and then
trying to play with that on your
shoulders is just like really tough like
i had
i've you have to learn how to like
transcend it into
admiration or like turn it into them
making you more competitive
how do you do that find an inspiration
uh i think it was just like dealing with
the jealousy for too long and just
feeling like
it i mean i still i still have like
chelsea i don't think that's gone
um i think just now that i'm on top it's
like harder to be jealous because i'm
like i have
i finally did it but it's just
finally being able to get good runs and
like feel like you can do it and
yeah how do you do that though right so
i'm imagining like i'm watching other
people's
records and i get number three and i
look at them and i say
[ __ ] those guys and
and i find myself wanting to be like
them why can't i be like them
why can't i be better why can't i focus
on the game why do i have to have these
kinds of thoughts
i know i shouldn't worry about them i
should just worry about mario
yeah how do you actually get out of that
frame of mind
probably looking at it more objectively
like not even looking at the run as
their run
just looking at their run as the run
like this is the run to beat
and looking at their strategies and
seeing okay what am i not doing because
not everybody's doing the same strats
we're
like some people are doing faster stuff
here faster stuff there
and so i basically just kept working on
my own strats until i felt like i
until it just felt like i can definitely
get record no problem
like just practicing a lot off stream
learning new stuff
and then getting to the point where i'm
doing the same stuff as them
i'm i am fast enough etc and then
finally being able to see the results
from how do you how do you go from why
can't i be
like them to because this is important
right the person who is jealous of the
number one who's sitting at number three
is lacking confidence they have jealousy
they have envy
how do you move from there to i can't do
this
i am fast enough you finally have a run
that's like really good pace you you
finally like
you don't beat it like you don't finish
it but you get close like you're getting
to the end of the run
and that's after just practicing and
finally like hitting the stuff that i've
been practicing
in a run because like practice versus
runs there's two completely different
worlds like you can hit something in
practice but then when you're actually
trying to go
and doing that straight on a run it's
like it's going to be a lot different
okay so what i'm hear you say is that
you practice
and when you practice i think what
you're doing is you're devoting yourself
once again to the task
and then the ego steps aside so i want
to point out a couple things
one is that so what are the things that
corrupt dharma
so ego is one when you start to compare
and if we listen to to ryan twitch what
you guys will also see is he says that
the jealousy is still there
right i think a big mistake that people
make is they assume that once they
conquer something it's gone even the
word conquer
implies like victory forever
but that's not how it works and dharma
is not something you
find that is like finite and then you've
done it
it's something that i want you guys to
understand that ryan has been struggling
to find his dharma
like every single day for the last nine
months
because it gets corrupted and you feel
it slip away
right and then you have to like try to
get it again and then you've got it for
a little while and then it like slips
away
and then you have to like get it again
yeah and so it's a practice so the
biggest thing that people i think
misunderstand is that when we talk about
dharma it's sort of like oh i found my
dharma period
even i struggle every day with like
finding my dharma
it's something that is like kind of an
ongoing task so ego so what are the
signs of ego you find yourself comparing
what is the solution to comparison you
practice
and what practice means is that you
focus on the task because then it's not
about
them or you or their time or your time
it's about i'm gonna try to do this
thing in the game
does that make sense yeah okay
and then what happens is like when you
start to do the thing and you stop
worrying about other people then what
happens is
your mind is free of the bias of other
people and then you're like oh when i
actually look at
what i'm able to produce it's actually
pretty good it still needs work but it's
pretty good
and even if it's crappy you can still
work on it and then eventually you'll
get to pretty good
but the key thing is to focus on the
task at hand
and and this is where people talk about
being in the present
um but ego corrupts the dharma that's
number one
next thing that corrupts dharma is
expectation
and you know ryan you said something
about this can you say something a
little bit more about
you know how expectation creeps in
it's very subtle um like for me at least
in speedrunning it'll be
it'll be like okay this level that i'm
going into
is pretty easy you know like from an
objective standpoint
what we do in this level isn't that hard
and what's funny is that when you have
those thoughts
like those levels will slap you the
hardest like i'll get through the
hardest part
objectively the hardest part of the run
slam it be like oh that was so good
now i just need to make it through this
level and i'm and once i do that thought
i think that's already the expectation
it's like this is an easy level
and like classifying it as easy now it's
like okay if i mess it up
i'm a big failure like i just messed
that up so bad i lost my time and now i
feel terrible
and if it's a reset i feel like a huge
[ __ ] because i'm just like wow i
can't believe
i messed up on the easy level and now
the next runs are gonna hurt
because i'm like in that hurt mindset
yeah so you know it's interesting so i
work with some esports professionals
and one of the interesting things that
we uncover like you know what causes
tilt
is it expectation yes
and and what kind of expectation so
i was talking to someone are you feeling
the mobas
yep so that's why league is actually
what got me into mario
funny enough how does that work so
you play league and then you're like
[ __ ] this [ __ ] on everyone
league not a lot of good experiences
with that game but i
it brought me to twitch and twitch is
where i found mario like in 2012 one of
the biggest streamers on twitch
was siglemek and he was a mario
speedrunner and that
that's what gave me inspiration to try
it out cool so
here's an interesting thing so you're
right it's expectation so
let me ask you something if you're
playing a game
and let's say you go 0 and 2 in mid
there's a chance you get tilted right
yeah
so do you think you're more likely to
get tilted
by the end of the game are you more
likely to be tilted if you start 0 and 2
or you start 2-0
tuna for sure why interesting right
very interesting pay attention folks
so if you're starting 2-0 you're like oh
man i'm popping off i got this
i'm in a good spot like you're probably
a little bit
fed you know you feel like you can
influence the game a lot
and then if anything goes wrong or you
start to fall apart you're going to be
way more upset
but a comeback is way more hype like o2
you're like
well this game's already in the [ __ ]
and now you're just kind of
grinding away and then if you can bring
it back it's like
it's you didn't expect it at all you
don't expect nothing when you're o2
you're like all right
i'm expecting a loss so anything's
better than a loss yep
absolutely right so it's bizarre so like
this is something that i think really
holds back a lot of good players
is this idea that when you're 2-0 you're
expecting a win
and when they're like jungler or
whatever ganks you twice
you're way more tilted because you were
supposed to win that game
you dumpstered all over that shitty
and then your jungler is [ __ ] afk
while theirs is ganking you
whereas like bizarrely if you're 0-2
because their jungler ganked you twice
you can still be a little bit tilted
there but it's completely different
yeah you can go 0-2 because they're
jungler gank twice and then you can get
one solo kill or their jungler your
jungler finally shows up and ganks them
once and then you're one and two
completely different game from if you're
two and oh and their jungler ganks you
twice
or even once and then you're two in one
and you're still more tilted
yeah for sure crazy right expectation
expectation is the enemy
meditation and spiritual training is
like so this is the thing no one teaches
us this stuff
but literally you can train yourself to
expect less
it's a cognitive process and we'll talk
about changing undesirable traits and
meditation and stuff like that
you can literally rewire your brain to
expect
less when you rewire your brain to
expect less
you'll be less likely to tilt and
therefore you'll win more games
because the crazy thing is that when
you're 2-0 and you get
get ganked twice by their jungler and
you start tilting
the funny thing is like you're probably
still even
or maybe you're a little bit behind
because later kills are worth more than
early kills
but you're not as far behind as your
tilt itself would think
yeah it distorts your perspective it
absolutely distorts it and then you end
up losing more games than you really
should
and the reason that you lose the game
that you should win is because you
thought you should have won it already
which is bizarre yeah so freeing
yourself
expectation and the thoughts are subtle
right and this is also where meditation
comes in because like you see
and if you train yourself to catch the
subtlety so meditation is about actually
increasing the subtlety of your mind
that's one of the definitions of the
practice
it's your ability to notice things that
are smaller and smaller and smaller
about yourself
um and so when you
it's like you're watching like you're
playing the game and then you look over
and you happen to see your viewer
account yeah
and if you glance over and your viewer
count is lower than it was yesterday
what happens you start to feel worse
why what are the thoughts you have
it's like why am i why am i lower than
usual am i not being as entertaining
sometimes it's obvious like you just
know that you're i mean
especially back when i was like months
ago when i was grinding
if you're doing bad runs you're gonna
expect it to be lower
because you're just like playing bad
it's like people aren't going to be
there
but it still hurts you're like wow
people just want to see like good runs
and that's fair that's how it is
it's kind of how speedrunning works yep
well so the interesting thing is that i
think that when you say that's
fair that's not expectation
my sense is that when you when you look
at the lower view account you say that's
fair you're actually moving towards
dharma
i think looking back on these moments i
can say that it's fair but in those
moments when it actually is happening i
probably don't
feel that same way because if it's
hurting then i'm probably not thinking
it's fair i'm like
yeah yeah right so but that too you can
see the difference
the way that you respond to that moves
you further away from dharma or closer
if you say yeah these guys are you know
my my viewer count is lower
because i'm not performing as well let
me focus on performing
and if the viewers are going to come
they're going to come but it has to do
ultimately do with the way that i play
the game
and if you start thinking about oh the
viewers are not coming and then you
start thinking if ego arises
and this too if you start to feel bad
then ego is more likely to arise
what do you think about that when you
feel bad is when you compare more
that's definitely pretty accurate
um
if you feel bad you start to compare
more yeah
because i mean you'll be lower and
you'll be like well yesterday i had
more viewers or these other players get
more viewers
when they play worse than me or
something like that you just start going
on weird tangents that don't even make
sense anymore it's like
the momentum yeah yeah so so this is
what happens so
bad emotion leads to ego ego leads to
comparison
comparison is a function of the ego
so if you're comparing are you always in
an ego state
generally speaking i'm gonna say yes
you can make comparisons without ego but
for the most part
ego is what triggers the most comparison
so so you know this because you can look
at a different speed runner and you can
analyze how they do things and how you
do things and there doesn't have to be
ego there
yeah but comparison
is usually ego you can look at their
thing as their own thing
and you can look at your thing as your
own thing and you can acknowledge the
difference between those two
but that isn't comparison right
comparison is when you set the two side
by side and you say like
this does that make sense yeah
and so you can you can look at a
gazelle and you can say wow a gazelle is
fast and you can look at a cheetah and
you can say wow
cheetah's fast and then the second you
say like oh like look at that cheetah
that cheetah so much faster than the
gazelle
that becomes a comparison although that
doesn't sound like it's ego at all but
yeah you know generally speaking i'd say
that for our population and our
community
most of the comparisons they make are
not dispassionate
and that most of them are dependent on
ego
okay so um
how do you protect yourself from that
do you have any ideas from getting
caught in like an ego state
yep just staying as focused as you can
on the task
like i like the flow state or whatever
you kind of hit that if you can just
what i do is just like listen to sounds
in the game and if i can listen to those
for a prolonged amount of time
like deeply then all of a sudden i'm
like it's like i built that momentum up
like
i was able to put one minute or two
minutes of pure focus in and now i'm
like
in the zone okay i think beautiful so
that is a tar now
that you're doing so i want you guys to
notice means a focusing technique
your camera's broke yeah thank you
so adharana is a focusing technique it's
essentially a meditative practice
and what i want you guys to notice is
that when he focuses his mind
on sounds what he does is doesn't give
fuel to the negative thoughts and the
negative thoughts
breed additional thoughts right when you
give in to an expectation what happens
you've basically opened pandora's box
like that's the beginning of the
negative momentum yep so tell me what
pandora's box looks like can you give us
an actual example
um i mean one that i'm dealing with a
lot recently is like
so i have the decision like i want to
keep my sleep schedule good right so
it's like 2 a.m
and i'm like okay i can either go to bed
or i can go like
my one of my big vices is eating and
just like staying up late
uh so it's like either i go to bed or i
just make like a plate of chips watch a
quick video then i go to bed
and then if i go make that food come
back down then before i know it i'm like
it's like two hours later i ate like
multiple
bags of chips or like i'll just make
snacks like we have so much
junk food in this house i'll just be
like deep in the dumpster
all of a sudden and it feels like i got
there like i don't even remember
how i got here you know it's just like
all of a sudden you're
in the gutter yep right so so
so pandora's box one thing leads to
another there's a so i want you guys to
notice that the
deviation from dharma starts with a
subtle thought it's a tiny tiny thought
i can go to bed or it's not even a
decision it's just a possibility at that
point
yeah and then you give in to that
possibility and then that thought
breeds another thought which breeds
another thought which breeds another
thought
and then you get stuck in a cycle of
shame
or a stop like a panic attack or stuck
in anxiety paralyzed by fear
and all of those big big thoughts that
two hours later
you're covered in crumbs and your
stomach is upset
and there's like grease on your face and
you said make a plate of chips which
sounds delicious usually i eat them out
of the bag but it sounds like you take
it to the next level
yeah i've never heard of anyone making a
plate of chips maybe nachos
nachos yeah i make nachos i'll just like
get tortilla chips and put cheese on
them and then if we have meat i'll put
some meat on them
damn straight little my dude i didn't
that didn't slip by me i can tell
make a plate i know what that's like
all right put some black beans on there
if you want to be if you want to
alleviate your
guilt you can even chop up like fresh
tomatoes are good bell pepper is good
oh that's dangerous no but i mean like
at least if you're gonna
eat the plate of nachos like chop some
[ __ ] in there and then
get some veggies you know what i'm
saying true
you know black beans also potentially
healthier alternative to
to like taco meat i i get you though
not as tasty sometimes you want it to
just be greasy you just
want to be yeah but the chips and the
cheese is going to do that trust me
if you try putting some black beans on
there and you season them you got to
season them well
okay i'll give it a shot if you're
hungry enough at 2 30 in the morning
it's going to taste delicious man
you don't really need the taco beet try
it get back to me
me know i'll let you know dm me
let me know for sure um
but the the key thing here is that
there's a subtle thought and then it
leads to this pandora's boxes you put it
yeah and so the key thing is if you can
catch that subtle thought
at its inception and kind of
catch it and not let it grow and the way
that you not let it grow is you can
refocus your mind so i think you do a
good job of like you're the hotter in a
practice
which is you listen to the sounds so
literally what you're doing with your
concentration and your attention
is you're focusing on a sound and if
you're focusing on a sound you literally
cannot think at the same time
you may have distracting thoughts so
like your mind is focused on the sound
and then it like deviates this way and
then you bring it back to the sound
then it deviates this way and you bring
it back to the sound if it deviates a
third time and each time it deviates it
gets a little bit weaker a little bit
weaker a little bit weaker
and then ultimately it'll stop and then
you'll be in the zone
so that's literally the practice of
meditation
yeah um and it starts with a subtle
thought we talked about expectation
we talked about ego so now we're going
to talk about
momentum any questions so far
no okay so quick question we're gonna
we're gonna
i'm gonna just check in with twitch chat
for a second i usually don't look at
twitch chat but
twitch chat do you guys have any
questions so far or is this making sense
i see you got some new emotes in the
chat i was looking earlier you got the
the fish fish bog do you see those on
your screen
i don't know what that is it's like the
fish that's just
going crazy oh that's what that is i've
been seeing that thing a lot
i didn't realize it was a fish
okay so so i'm asking them if they have
questions and all i'm seeing is the fish
i should have missed anything about that
no no i mean it's fine it's just
they're going crazy okay okay so i'm
gonna assume that this is good
because we're just seeing fish what does
the fish mean does the fish mean people
are happy or unhappy yeah it's just like
excitement it's
it's just like intensity like you just
amplify whatever you're saying if you
put the fish next to it i feel like
it's just high intensity okay
okay so so they seem to be they feel
like this is a super high intensity
conversation
about this no they're just saying it
because i said
fish fog okay yeah okay so let's talk
about momentum
so i want you to reframe so momentum is
like something that they obs you observe
after the fact
first thing right you're like yeah like
momentum is happening you don't know how
exactly how you create it but you
observe it
as an after effect
yeah i mean at least in the negative
senses i think when i'm doing like
positive things i can kind of feel it in
the moment but when it's like negative
or
bad it's like i go and start to go like
out of touch
and just sort of unconscious and then i
look back and i'm like wow that
that escalated quickly so i'm gonna
reframe momentum
with a different word i'm gonna call it
karma
or karma okay what do you think about
that does that
ring any bells for you yeah i've heard
you talk a lot about karma
it's it's like the cause and effect yep
and it's rawest form you call it like
cause effect
yep so if we think about momentum what i
think this means is that you are sowing
a seed
that reaps a fruit
which in turn gives you many more seeds
that you can plant
and that it like exponentially amplifies
yep so sowing positive karma leads to
positive karma and then if you continue
to sow positive karma
you're gonna reap positive karma and the
same is true of negativity
right if you give in to that first
subtle negative thought
you will reap 10 more negative thoughts
yeah and that becomes even harder
and then if you indulge those 10
thoughts you will reap
a hundred negative thoughts and even
women
and then you find yourself being 25
years old living at home
not sure what to do with your life
because you are
swimming in a half decade
of negative karma that you've sowed for
yourself
and whether it be nachos at 2 a.m
or you know indulging in certain kinds
of like
content on the internet that sort of
traps you or makes you thumb sick which
you can explain what that is
but like there's a lot of like negative
karma like using substances i think is a
good example
of something that alleviates feelings in
the present
but opens you up for negative karma down
the road
yeah you're more likely to turn to that
again absolutely because it doesn't
actually solve anything right it just
makes you feel better
yeah and even in some cases like if you
look at substances like marijuana
marijuana actually decreases your
motivate it doesn't make people stupider
but what it does is
is hamper with your motivational drives
and so the classic idea of a pothead is
someone who sits around and doesn't do
anything all day that's because
you know that's sort of somewhat true so
there are productive people who use
marijuana on a regular basis but if you
take 100 people
and they use marijuana and you take 100
people who don't use marijuana
the people who don't use marijuana are
more likely to be more productive
on average and so a lot of what what
happens in terms of like being stuck in
life
is essentially you're reaping all of
these bad fruit
fruits i mean the seeds that you sow
so you're reaping negative fruit from
sowing bad seeds
and in momentum it works both ways
right like like if you maintain a good
sleep schedule like why do you care
about maintaining a good sleep schedule
because then i everything else will be
better like i cannot focus
how the [ __ ] does that what do you mean
everything else will be better how does
that work
what do you mean everything will be
better what is it like just a flat out
buff 20
yeah yes you're damn right it is
and that's exactly how it works this is
sewing positive karma
right like literally your cognitions are
better
your brain clears out this waste product
called adenosine
which is like a waste product from your
brain and adenosine when your brain
uses energy for cognition it takes this
thing called
atp and turns it into adenosine
and then when you sleep you clear out
that adenosine and you turn it back into
atp
and it literally means that your brain
has more energy when you have restful
sleep
and people who do not have good restful
sleep cycles
which doesn't just mean the hours that
you sleep it also means the kind of
substances that are in your brain when
you fall asleep
it also means the ratio of like
rem sleep to non-rem sleep so generally
speaking this
your sleep cycle changes over the
duration of your sleep
so it starts out with longer i think
phase one and phase two sleep
and over time as you go through multiple
sleep cycles the phase one and phase two
shrink
and i think you have more non-rem sleep
i'm a little bit rusty on the details
but literally your fifth hour and sixth
hour of sleep
are not the same as your first or second
hour from
of sleep from a physiologic and
neuroscientific sense
and then furthermore that that shift
in your sleep cycle is reinforced by a
circadian rhythm do you know what that
means
that's just like your general sleep
schedule i don't know too much yep
so circadian rhythm is your body clock
so if you're used to sleeping at the
same time every day and it also is like
your bodily clock
it'll enhance the quality of your sleep
so i think a big problem in terms of
negative karma that our community faces
is that they're like
they have crappy sleep which in turn
means that they're like
when they you know when you rest you
play rpgs
on occasion so when you rest in an end
what happens to your mana bar
refill everything refills you're back
absolutely
and our community when they when they go
to sleep their mental
bar only fills up 60 and then they're
confused as
like why they suck at life right so it's
nuts
but like this kind of physiology
physiology stuff is is important
and then the other thing ryan i just
want to say explicitly is you are the
guy who holds the world record
for 120 stars in super mario
and you are also saying that sleep is
vitally important
yeah and so if you guys don't believe me
listen to the world champion
um it's tough though now cause like i
feel like since i got it
it's hard to care as much about that you
know like the hunger
yeah like the thirst to play well isn't
as
in front of my mind like i feel like
that i was able to keep a more
consistent sleep schedule before the
world record than after
yep so that's just like whatever now
we're going to talk about that and we're
going to explore a little bit further i
just want to tie up one last thing about
karma so what i want you to think about
for all of you guys is what are you
sewing for tomorrow
and and just like you said earlier if i
can do the laundry maybe i can play
super mario
right so every action you take you're
sewing you're sewing a seed that's going
to bear fruit
and so when you eat those nachos that's
cool like if you can even deviate a
little bit and throw a little bit of
tomato or bell pepper or cilantro on
there
that's actually going to help you out
the next day
that makes sense right so it's going to
help with your fiber
it's going to keep you regular it's
going to promote bacteria that are
anti-anxiety and anti-depression
in your gut when you have fresh fruits
and vegetables literally
not kidding there are studies that show
that you can take depressed mice
and do a stool transplant into healthy
mice and once you transplant their stool
from the depressed mouse to the healthy
mouse
the healthy mouse becomes depressed wild
but even something as simple as eating
fresh fruits and vegetables can actually
affect your mood
so think about good sleep good
absolutely
so but think about those things as
positive karmas and tell yourself that
like every time you you do an
action you're setting yourself up for a
man a buff
or a man a debuff three days from now
and the more that you can focus on
buffing up your mana bar like three four
five six seven days down the road the
better off you're gonna be
okay any questions about that or we you
wanna move to the hunger
that's no long that's now been satisfied
and no longer keeps you on track
um i guess one question about that is
like how
why is it so hard like even if you know
fully well like oh yeah if i go to sleep
that's definitely the better move
it's still really difficult to just
good like it's so easy to just stay up
and just make
make that play to nachos just why do you
think it's hard
probably because it's like an immediate
thing like you get an immediate
immediate satisfaction versus the
delayed
i'd go even further i'd say that what
you're get
what so this is the struggle it's not
even about immediate versus delayed
it's about real versus unreal
because what is that if you don't eat
the plate of nachos
what does tomorrow look like
it's the same and if you do eat the
nachos what does tomorrow look like
hopefully the same like you want to
believe there's no
there's no difference in your mind just
think about that for a second
and that's like the subtle thing yeah
you like if you you
think you can just do one but then once
you do one that's where it starts to
everything starts to like get distorted
because like like really when you're
sitting there and you're looking at the
plate of nachos and you say if i don't
eat this like what's gonna happen like
you're not
really sure it's just better for you
but what does that practically mean it
means nothing yeah
there's no tangible cost in your mind
so the reason that it's hard is not
because you're dumb or you're lazy
it's because your mind has a tangible
benefit
versus nothing
if you really stop and think about like
what you're gonna eat some you're gonna
chop up some bell pepper on your nachos
so
what happens nothing
nothing is gonna happen
if you eat the bell pepper you don't eat
the bell pepper how are you gonna ever
notice a difference you're not going to
notice a difference
yeah so this is where what you guys need
to learn how to do
is to act for no reason
the problem is that all of our actions
are driven by reasons
this is what paralyzes us
because we know what happens when you
play the game for reasons because we
talked about this right
what happens when you play the game for
reasons ryan
you start to get lost in the sauce
bizarre and crazy right yeah we're
taught our we're conditioned our entire
life to do something
because of something that's what [ __ ]
us
because what happened in our
generation's case is we were taught you
do this
and then this will happen and in our
case what happened
is like we were told go to college and
then you'll be
buy a house and then like that was a
scam
yeah and so we were taught yep we were
taught to do things for reasons and then
those reasons turned out to be false
so now you have a generation of people
who don't know how to act because every
time they've acted it's for a reason
and so bizarrely the way that you you
stop doing it
is that like you let go of the reason
you say to yourself
i'm not doing this because
stool transplants and rats alleviate
depression like that's a stretch
yeah right i'm doing this because i
choose to
i'm doing this because like as a human
being i want the capacity to control my
own life
and i want you guys to understand that
if you're doing something for a reason
you're not in control
because if you take the reason away you
wouldn't do it
but there's like a great reason and that
would that be dharma yes
that reason is internal though what i'm
talking about is a particular outcome
okay in terms of a reason right like if
i tell you why
why would you eat bell pepper like
there's an
external reason that you're weighing
against the immediate satisfaction of
eating the food
does that make sense or did i lose you
uh it's getting abstract okay
yeah let me try again so
you know there's a good outcome to
eating the plate of nachos
whereas not eating the nachos has an
unclear vague i'll be healthy
like that's not a real thing right
you have to like zoom out zoom out and
then and then also just do something for
the sake of doing it just like you said
when you play the game of mario
you're not thinking about an outcome
you're just doing it for the sake of
doing it
so what you need to train yourself to do
and it starts and then people say how do
you do this it starts small
right so the next time that you're
eating you prepare some food for
yourself
what you need to do is like do a tiny
like get a little bit of xp
the way that you get a little bit of xp
is you spend a little bit more effort
putting something on there that you
normally wouldn't put that's supposed to
be good for you
and you recognize that you are never
going to notice the difference
but you are doing it for the sake of
doing it you're playing the game for
mario you're not doing it for the world
record
so to act in that moment for the sake of
the thing
as opposed to some other thing you're
not doing it for viewership count you're
not doing it
for world record you're not doing it to
refill your mana bar
you're not doing it to be to live longer
you're not doing it to prevent
hemorrhoids you're just gonna do it
because that's what you've decided to do
just do it yes
but just do it is not easy that's not
how it works
just doing it is a god-awful struggle
against yourself
you recognize that within yourself there
are going to be a thousand reasons
which tell you don't do this thing
and then you tell them to go [ __ ]
themselves and you do it anyway
just do it is not easy it's in spite of
yourself
did you like force yourself yeah
not force overcome
okay and you're gonna lose that battle a
lot
and that's okay okay just gotta keep
resetting just like in mario 64 man
just got to keep going yep yep push
through it
okay other questions does that make
sense
okay so let's talk about the hunger so
you used to have this hunger
that aligned all of your actions yes
now what i don't know man now i'm just
like i got it
and you know before it was like this is
a challenge worth going for i've never
done it like if i can do it and conquer
the nerves that's huge
and now i did it once and i'm like and
and usually when people have gotten
world record in the past they keep going
and keep pushing and like push it lower
but every time it gets pushed lower it
does get harder to do
and so i'm just i'm really struggling to
to find
find that hunger yeah yeah so it sounds
to me like you've in a sense
completed this chapter of your life yeah
that's kind of where i'm at like i feel
sort of in limbo in that sense
yeah so then the question so that's okay
so let's start by just thinking
acknowledging that that just because
some people
continue to try to push it lower doesn't
mean you have to
how do you feel about yourself ryan
pretty good okay in general how did you
feel about yourself 10 months ago
um
10 months ago that's when i started
playing i felt really good
so i was like at the beginning of the
journey it felt like very fulfilled
okay 12 months ago really bad
tell me about that so at that time i was
dealing with like
carpal tunnel and tendonitis and that
was something that's why i had taken a
break from mario in the first place
and i was like really lost because i
wasn't doing anything like anything that
i liked doing
hurt because i had like this chronic
pain
and so like i like to make music i like
to um
what else coding obviously computer
science like i'd like to code stuff and
all that would just hurt and so i was
just kind of in pain and that was not
fun and so i didn't want to do anything
i couldn't play mario
and yeah i felt very very unfulfilled
that was probably like the worst part
probably like one of the darkest moments
of my life at least it felt like
just like very numb very unconscious
very robotic
and then um a viewer recommended a book
to me that
i was able to like conquer the
tendonitis and carpal tunnel with
and then i came back what's the book
the mind body prescription interesting
can you tell us about that it's this
idea that your repressed emotions are
causing
your pain like your tendonitis or carpal
tunnel
and so you have to like journal
and try to reflect and figure out what
are you not addressing
in your life that might be pressuring
you that you have no idea about
like yeah and did you find some that you
were
repressing something yeah it was mostly
stuff related to my family just like
worrying about
parts of my family was like a big one
and
myself like my pressure with school and
like doing the master's program
i think was causing a fair amount how do
you feel about the master's program
at the moment yeah like now um
i feel like it was a waste of time like
i
i did it mostly because my parents
wanted me to do it and it was like a
free ride
like i was able to get in and do
teachers assistantship so i was a ta
and then it was all paid for which
sounded like a great deal and i was like
okay i should do this
but then when i was actually doing it
like it felt very mundane and it felt
like
if i wanted to keep doing it i could
just do it on my own at this point like
i knew enough that i could just figure
out what i wanted to figure out if i
wanted to code something
or whatever do you want to code yeah
so are you learning how to code
that's something that is like it feels
like one of those side things that i
want to do that kind of fulfills
like i don't know soul i guess like it
feels very good to code
i've had some side projects in the past
and at the moment i'm like
waiting to get into the next one like i
have an idea i haven't sat down and
started it
what keeps you from sitting down and
starting it
i'm not really sure so i think that's
what we have to explore
so here's what i think um ryan
so i think that your karma and your
dharma
so karma triggers your dharma this is
the first thing to understand
so the example that i use is let's say
i'm a doctor
and i'm working in the emergency room
and what is my dharma
it depends on who comes in
right so if like no one comes in then my
time was to sleep well
if someone does come in overnight it's
to wake up and help those people
so in your case i think that your karma
called you to do certain things right so
if you think about it your circumstances
gave you the opportunity to do a
master's degree for free
and that sounds like a wonderful
wonderful thing you were so lucky ryan
so privileged yeah and then then you
were given that opportunity and then in
that opportunity you had this little
voice that said this is not for me
and then you embarked on this journey
your camera's blurry again by the way
oh no you embarked on this journey
and then you became a different person
over the course of the last year
and it is my belief that the person that
you are today
is necessary for the next thing that you
have to do
okay and that if you had not dropped out
of your master's program
you would still have to conquer that
level before you moved on to the next
one
but think about the person that you've
become over the last year it's a
completely different person
yeah and i don't think it's like it's
kind of bizarre but like you know in
video games we don't like go to the last
boss at level two
we go to the first boss at level two
yeah and then you get stronger and then
you do the next thing so now you have a
good understanding of like
to a certain degree expectation your
mind
how to do dharuna how to focus how to
let go of expectation how to let go of
comparison
that those are going to be important
skills for the next phase of your life
because the next phase of your life
sounds
like it's going to be directionless and
what you're going to happen
is as as you're directionless and you're
working on this little project
which is going to be your dharma you're
going to look at
a dozen other people who finish their
master's degrees and got jobs
and you're going to need a certain
amount of fortitude to stick with your
thing
yeah instead of deviating and the way
that you leveled that up
is through mario speedruns yeah
and so recognize that whatever force it
is that
has brought you this far is also
supporting you now
and now the next thing it's trying to
teach you is like
why aren't you doing that coding project
that's the next phase i i suspect it may
be something else
but i think that you know what you want
to do and your
your next phase isn't just figuring out
like the motivation and studying
yourself and looking at yourself and
starting to do those things
and remembering that like you can get
caught up about what you should do and
stuff like that but
once you pick up the controller and you
start playing the game the rest is going
to take care of itself
yeah starting is the hardest part yep
and so now you need to learn how to do
that
because now you've got 10 percent to 90
taken care of
[Music]
it's zero to ten you've been training on
10 to 90 for the last year
and even to a certain degree you've also
trained about getting zero to ten
but i i mean to me it feels like you
should code what do you think about that
i mean while i'm still streaming like
that's my main thing i'm still doing
full-time streaming
so i obviously want to keep doing that
but yeah i think
when i think about like when i felt the
best it's like i'm feeding myself
i feel like there's two pillars of my
well-being it's like health is like
sleeping
eating meditating exercising and then
there's like soul
and that's like the hobbies like mario
code in music
whatever and so i just need to
actually do it like yep but but once
again
notice that you know actually doing it
is not just doing it
it's the opposite that every day you
wake up
and because remember like the reason you
can't do it is because you don't know
why you're doing it there's no goal
does that make sense yeah and so what's
the solution
to that do you have a sense
going in without any expectations yep
what that means is to have no reason to
do it
remember that right so like the the key
here is like why is it hard to eat the
plated i mean
why is it easy to eat the plate of
nachos it's because you do something
for a reason or no reason and it's hard
to pick no reason over a reason
yeah for sure and so you're going to
wake up tomorrow
and you're going to have no reason to
code and you've got to do it anyway
acknowledge that notice that
say that there's a part of me that wants
to sow the seed of karma
that will bear fruit three months from
now
but the effort of digging and planting
and planting and sticking the seed in
is like you're not going to see any
yield from that maybe the seed will
never grow
just do it is not easy it's actually
very hard you have to do it in spite
of all the things that hold you back
i like that right it's like you have to
continue playing
in spite of the fact that you're number
three
moving forward in life is about
abandoning reasons
not finding them yeah
i think i realized that when i actually
like finally made that final push to
record like i
i was like i know i can't do anything
about viewership or anything i just like
completely surrendered
and i was like i'm just gonna play i'm
not looking anymore and then that's when
everything just got way better
yep so so these are concepts that
unfortunately have gotten tangled up
with re
religion but devotion and surrender are
key
yeah this concept of like that's
literally what happened with me too like
i showed up on twitch one day and i was
like i'm gonna do this thing
and i thought that if in one year if i
had 200 concurrent viewers that would be
a success
it turns out that yes slightly more than
that
yeah right and i i think it's about
devoting yourself to the action and not
worrying about the viewership count
recently too we had a little bit of a
you know an interesting conversation at
healthygamer about like
who we interview on stream and what kind
of content we do
because we noticed that the more bigger
streamers we have the bigger our
viewership is and so it's like do we
want to cater to that do we want to
continue growing
we said actually no that's not what we
showed up here to do
we showed up here to help people and if
our viewership tanks our viewership
tanks
so be it right it's about having
conversations oh you're not like because
here's the thing ryan you're not gonna
have some kind of emotional catharsis at
the end of this conversation
yeah which is gonna impact our
viewership
but instead what we're going to try to
do is help you
and if the viewership goes down the
viewership goes down
right you do the thing for the sake of
the thing
yeah and in your case
i don't know exactly what it looks like
but i i think i'm not too worried about
you finding your dog
because i think it's just you've got
that voice like you know you want to
code or make music or whatever
so you start planting those seeds and
then something will take
root and then karma will show up and
will tell you what to do
but garma waits until you're ready and
what that mean do you want what kind of
coding do you want to do if you don't
mind me asking
making games obviously right so like
this is where i think bizarrely if you
want to
make a particular kind of game or you
want to work for a studio
do you have a resume no
i mean yeah but it's outdated kind of so
like i i think that
you know as crazy as this sounds i think
if you say i was in a master's program
so you're gonna have a cover letter
and you say i love games i love to code
you've got to code a couple of things
so that you have like some kind of
resume then i would put on your cover
letter i draw i had a full ride master's
program that i dropped out of
to become a streamer and i hold the
record for super mario 64. now i'm ready
to get back into coding
i understand games i understand them in
and out
i'm also a good coder and i don't need a
degree for that
will you give me a job here's what i can
do
and if i was a game developer i would
[ __ ] hire you internet stuff
it's good right it's bizarre
there are a thousand kids out there who
have masters in computer science
very few hold the world record in
anything
it speaks to me of dedication of focus
of a love of video games and if you can
code on top of that
[ __ ] a
okay what do you think about that
i think you're right i think
i just gotta like just doing it but not
doing it for any reason
yep right and i would suspect
that you thought that certain things
needed to happen
before you could get a job where you
want a job
i guess i mean i'm not um not really at
the moment thinking about like getting a
job though like i kind of want to do it
solo
stuff with streaming but yeah yeah so i
mean i think if you want to do stuff
solo you do
you don't have to get a job but i think
if you want to make games you should
[ __ ] wake up tomorrow and you should
start making games
or today right or today beautiful
it's a trick question saw through the
trap
right so i pay attention to a chat this
guy understands what he's talking about
tomorrow is it's easy
it's hard yeah but so the last thing
that i'll leave you with ryan is that
there is a game inside you
and that one day maybe a year from now
maybe five years from now or 10 years
from now
there's a bit going to be a kid who is
lost and directionless
and in order to help him you have to
make the game that he's going to play
to inspire him
i like that so that is your title
that like you have to understand that
somewhere just think about the person
who made super mario 64. what kind of
struggles do you think they had
how did the game get made
i mean consoles coming out pressure to
bring out like the first 3d game and
like you want it to be good you want it
to be memorable
you want it to be like a crazy
experience
on all of those accounts those are all
expectations
you see that that is not it's meeting
expectations that gets the kind of
aaa trash that we see it's formulaic
video gaming
that we see a lot of
i don't believe for a second that the
person who made super mario 64
the team that made super mario 64 was
trying to live up to expectations
i think what happened if i if i had to
bet money what i would say is there was
a group of people who loved mario
and said we now have the technology to
have mario move
in more than two directions
what kind of mate game can we make
and it's that desire it's the desire to
like create something that
in the frontier of video gaming nothing
had ever been made before
i want to make a mario game where i can
hide a star
in a place that has never been hidden
before even the concept of stars
just think about that non-linearity of
levels
necessitated the concept of stars to
begin with
because where is the point there's a
there's a linear trajectory in a 2d game
right in a 3d game like how do you
design a linear trajectory they had to
break out of the idea of a start and a
finish to a level
how do you guide a player when there's
no end of the level
gotta have the objectives exact
collectibles the moons the stars
but see the moons and the stars are all
objectives that's not what the first
person thought
that's what the duplicators thought does
that make sense
yeah they'd seen it done before yep
so that's what i think it happens to
mario now is they're like repeating a
formula
and they innovate a little bit but i
think the person who made super mario 64
was true like the team was truly
revolutionary
they tried to make the best game that
they could with like this entire new
dimension of technology it's like
i've played the flute my whole life and
suddenly you're giving me a set of drums
it's like what can i make with this
entire other instrument and i think
that's what you've got to do
you've got to think about the game that
hasn't been made before
that you have to make because you're a
[ __ ] gamer man and you're one of us
so we need good [ __ ] to play
how does that sound for the thunder that
sounds pretty good
that does sound pretty good hesitations
i mean a little bit i still
like i think that is definitely part of
it but i feel like i still have
like streaming is like my main thing
that i'm doing like with most of my time
and so i guess i mean the game does
involve streaming so
that would that would make sense so i
don't think it's like exclusive
i think the the big problem that i see
with you is like a hump to get started
so i'd say get started
and maybe you won't end up making a game
maybe it won't work out whatever
but devote yourself to the task and see
if that amount of inspiration is enough
to get you started
and then your karma will determine the
rest
you'll wake up one day and then just
like you said with super mario 64
you'll wake up one day and you'll say i
can do this
and i can't do this exactly and so all
you have to do is sew the karma
to give yourself a chance
all right
sounds good i will give it a chance okay
give it a shot
what about undesirable traits
um something that has come up and has
always kind of been around is like
jealousy
like i said before like that was with
mario and now it's getting blurry man i
don't know why just
it's everything you should pour it in
the chair like when you do that is when
it gets bored all right that's okay all
right
and now it's like i have seen some
growth from
streaming um and now i i'm
before i wasn't really comparing or
sorry before i was comparing
and then i saw some growth you know from
world record
and now it's like i thought that i
solved it because i wasn't doing it
anymore but now i'm finding like
new things to compare to other streamers
that are bigger you know it's always
like the climb
and it's just it feels awful and that
that's part of the thing that pushes the
momentum sometimes like
it's it's not even about like should i
get a plate of chips
it's like i'm comparing and then the
next thing i know i'm like eating and
then i'm up late
if that makes sense at all yeah explain
that to us a little bit
so
like up late at night and i'm looking at
my stats
and then i'm thinking about other
streamers who are around my size who are
bigger than me or who have like grown
faster than me and just looking at their
size just like literally just looking at
the stats looking back and forth and
being like okay
i i'm not as i'm not growing as fast or
like
i'm not seeing like growth that i want
and then
i mean it seems so obvious like looking
back on it now but in the moment it
feels like
it just makes perfect sense like i'm not
it's not like egotistical
but or it's not like negative but that's
like the subtle thoughts
yep so let me ask you a question why do
you look at the stats late at night
it's like when i end stream i finish
stream and then i'll like look at my
stats
and then be like okay what frame of mind
are you in when you finish stream
um kind of tired like
feeling like i'd accomplish that so now
i can like turn my brain off kind of
thing and be lazy
yep and then when you when your brain is
in a lazy place
and you look at stats what happens
i start comparing myself
it's just like it's so easy to do it's
like automatic like
and and twitch will do it for you
they'll be like oh this stream compared
to your last stream like it'll say right
in front like
less followers or more viewers you know
and you either feel good or bad but like
i don't i don't want to have that at all
i don't want to be like
have those good feelings or have those
bad feelings so we can talk about you
know
the nature of your confidence and
jealousy and all that kind of crap
but today i want to focus on the process
and mechanism of mind
so first thing that i want to point out
is that when you're feeling lazy
and you're out of mana and you look at
your stats
yeah when you're exhausted
how able are you to catch the subtle
thoughts and steer them in a different
direction
not at all right and so then they start
to feed
and they start to grow it's just as
simple as when you look at your twitch
stats
i would once again i would once again
bet money that if you looked at twitch
stats
if you dedicated a time of your day to
work
on your stream not just look at it like
a report card
but say like okay how can i grow my
stream let's do some analysis
but you did so with a full mana bar your
experience will be completely different
so maybe don't do it late at night after
i'm burnt out when i'm not really in a
great place to
be doing it exactly right so if you're
not in a great place
your mind is gonna be exhausted and then
you're gonna latch on
to things that you normally wouldn't
latch onto with a clean head
definitely and so as bizarre as that is
like it's it's strange but like just the
fact that you're looking
and it's hard because i don't know why
our mind does this but
our mind feeds us the worst kind of
information when we are the most
vulnerable
when you're feeling bad about yourself
is when you go and like you look at like
the social media profile of your
ex-girlfriend who cheated on you
and saw how awesome her life is yeah you
just wanna
it's weird i have no idea but it's like
you want it to get worse
yep in a way like a part of you you just
want to make it the worst it can be
absolutely it's weird right that our
mind doesn't
and you let it yeah
because there's like i mean that happens
like with friends too like good friends
like
friends that i really like hanging out
with and like talking with you know
when good things happen to them like
there is always that side that's like
man i want i want that to happen to me
like i
like envy or jealousy and trying to find
a way to like
you know sometimes i'm like i'm so happy
for you but like i'm really
like the way i'm feeling is not exactly
that but i don't want to say that
because it's like
you're just a bad bad friend if you're
just like jealous of someone
yep so i i think uh ryan you have some
work left to do my friend
right so there's something about you and
and maybe this is a conversation for a
different day
because i don't know we have if we have
the time for it today but to think a
little bit about why can't you be happy
for someone else
because something within you is
unsatisfied
that makes sense right it's like when i
sit down to dinner
and i eat my meal and then someone else
is eating their meal and they say wow
this is really delicious
and i can be like oh wow that's awesome
man i'm glad you really enjoyed it
but if i don't have any food and i'm
broke and homeless and someone else is
talking about how
their food is so delicious it's really
hard for me to be genuinely happy with
that
for them all right so what's missing
you got to have a good meal you got to
be enjoying what you're eating then you
don't care
like yeah i think i've the jealousy has
definitely been worse
after the world record than before for
sure because i felt like way more
fulfilled
during the grind that makes sense
and so there's something left where like
you had to conquer some demons
to be able to walk away from on paper
what seemed like a wonderful opportunity
for a master's degree
and live your life and you've achieved
and it sounds also like you had to do
some emotional work
around conquering your tendonitis in
your carpal tunnel
yeah but i think there's definitely a
conversation that needs to be had about
like
why are you unsatisfied with the life
that you have
and i think you know the answer yeah
yeah got a code gotta feed my soul
a little bit more i don't i don't think
that that's the entirety of it
i think that something happened to you
that left you very unsatisfied you felt
like you got a bad beat
i think that there's there's some
expectation in your life that has been
dashed
yeah think about that it's probably the
world record like i had this big
goal and then i finally achieved it and
then like nothing really changed
i got surprised how little i felt after
getting it
felt like a void kind of
interesting i would suspect that
something happened even earlier in your
life and that it's not related to the
world record at all
but definitely you know you're saying
that the world record felt
kind of like a let yeah i mean in the
moment it felt amazing but like the
following days it's like
okay now what yeah so then now what is
also
some part of your being telling you now
what let's do something else
which is okay i have a question
about like when is there any like
question i can ask
myself when i to to check
like if i'm in the state of am i sewing
like negative or positive karma is there
a way
to check or do you just have is it just
depend on the thought like
better ways to tell okay is this going
to be bad or good
yes i think it's not so much a question
but a state of mind
so i'd say that the two things to look
at is am i experiencing negative emotion
and is ego present here
right so it's about looking at
expectation it's about looking at ego
it's about looking at your internal
state of self
and if you're behaving from a tranquil
center
then you'll sow positive karma
and if you're behaving from a
non-tranquil center then you'll sow
negative karma
and i would really like so i think a
good example is like really look at
yourself when you finish stream
why do you want to look at stream stats
then
it's just like it's become a habit over
time i guess i don't doubt it but why
did you start
i'm not sure i mean i think it's just
like a natural thing you want to see if
you're growing or not you want to see if
you're doing good
see there's reasons there
you want to see if you're growing or not
that's expectation it's about benchmarks
you know and i do think it's important
to do as a streamer like you've got to
look at your stats
but like you want to do so like i would
check your stats like once a week
that's a good idea and also compile it
with like okay what are strategies like
don't just look at other people and be
like driven by jealousy in a sense of
whether you're falling behind or not
recognize that as a streamer you need to
do some things to grow your stream
and sit down i mean this is in a sense
i'm lucky because
like i don't worry about growing my
stream like someone is kind enough to
help me do that
so they worry about all that [ __ ] and
for them like so it's it's nice because
i like literally in my life i've been
lucky enough to separate out the stream
growth from the actual streaming
is nice and and not everyone has that
privilege
and so i'm grateful for it and at the
same time you've got to do that
cognitively
yeah be your own like stream producer
for some hours of the day and i'd even
go as far as to say like
i don't know if you adhere to a schedule
or a calendar but i'd block off time and
be like okay i'm gonna look at three
other streamers and try to figure out
what are they doing that i want to do
just the same way that you did it with
with super mario 64.
which is not to compare yourself but
like be like okay what are the tricks
that they're using that i could think
about implementing
what do i want to go with what do i not
want to go with sit down look at all
your stream stats
okay because one of the most dangerous
things we see this in our coaching
program is like we collect a lot of
feedback
but we don't share it with our coaches
right away can you imagine why
collect a lot of feedback but you don't
share it with the coaches
right away
no so if we share bad feedback too
quickly
it's going to bias them the next session
sure right so what we want to do is
aggregate feedback
and look at trends not
not let people get biased because anyone
can have a bad day
but if i share a bad feedback what kind
of karma am i sewing for them for the
next week
more like they'll they'll be in their
head more they won't be able to just do
the task they're going to be like
i want to keep i want to be with coach
yep
i want to do good and then that will
inevitably be bad
yep right so we actually are careful
with how
how we share our data so we amalgamate
it and we look for trends
but anyone can have an off day and any
client can be
upset on a particular day or not feel
like they were helped
that's good i got to get the big sample
size example
and the problem is that when you're out
of mana at the end of the day
and you look at your stats your mind has
a cognitive bias towards the negative
and then over time it creates the
impression that you're doing a bad job
okay because not only is there
insufficient sample size there's
selectivity of the data that you collect
and we do this to ourselves all the time
right like there are people like in our
community who have
a lot of evidence that they're going to
die alone
and sure like that evidence is there
it's just incomplete or it's selective
sure biased yep and it's because they
look for it at that time when they're
like they're feeling bad about
themselves so let me go hit myself in
the nuts
and look at how my best friend is now
doing awesome
and i'm a piece of [ __ ] and then it
confirms for them right oh i'm a piece
of [ __ ]
see here's data right here let me go
look at that other guy who's also
successful oh see
they're doing better you never compare
yourself to the
the streamers that stopped streaming six
months ago do you
no
why not
because they're not streaming you wanna
just compare with whoever's around
whoever you can see
whoever you hear about yeah but you're
not it's not a fair sample size because
when you started streaming let's say 10
months ago
some people washed out yeah and so
you're
always comparing yourself to people
above you and it gives you a really
really bad sense of where you truly are
that's true you gotta watch out for all
these biases man they're a lot
i'm biased so really simply what i would
say you should do is is really pay
attention to the way that you
feel when you're looking at data
especially at the end of streams
okay because i think your jealousy
drives your data collection
definitely and that is not good
collection
skewed skewing it okay
right and then if you skew data
collection driven by jealousy
what is it going to do to the feelings
of jealousy
amplify them and then what's going to
happen to the kind of data you collect
it's going to be bad and eventually will
spiral
small karma big fruit
10 more karmas more jealousy more data
skewing
more jealousy data skewing
got it and now we get to watch any of
our streams with
popular streamers and you'll see that
all of them have [ __ ] impostor
syndrome
yeah it's like why is that it's because
these mechanisms are happening in your
mind
any other undesirable traits you want to
talk about
um i mean that's probably the biggest
one is
just like the jealousy thing so
concretely for jealousy the two things
i'd say to you one is be careful about
the way that you reinforce it
right so we just talked about that
second is i would do whatever that mind
body prescription
book told you to do i would consider
doing that again but
focusing on jealousy if you want to come
back on stream we can dig into that
together
okay or you can kind of do it on your
own but i think that that jealousy is a
some squad i don't know how much how
many of our streams that you watch
but we've talked about um you can check
out our youtube channel on the vedic
psychology
or like the vedic model of the mind but
i think you have
do you have like a specific video on
that like i've heard you say subscribe
yep so let me see if i can find it
actually
let's see if any of our mods are around
i can do some digging afterwards okay
around actually actually what you should
do is go
to our wiki because i think there's a
link in information on our wiki
okay okay yeah here's the link
i'm going to post in a twitch chat okay
okay
um and then just look at some scar and
then yeah let's see if we can
yep yeah there's there's a link in there
so the wiki's had to do it
right sweet i'll check that out
um yeah so any other questions
uh how much time do you have uh about
10 15 minutes what's up i think the last
thing something i forgot to mention is
like going deeper with
meditation or like meditating on
those undesirable traits like obviously
outside of meditation is one thing but
am i able to like tackle the jealousy
like inside of meditation like
absolutely
yeah so you want to tackle jealousy yeah
what kind of meditation do you do for a
while i was doing zen and then
i saw you do third eye and that that was
like a really good
session for me and so i've started doing
that since so that's okay
all i've done third eye meditation is
very well suited for you
right so i would encourage you to do it
again i can teach you another third eye
practice today if you want
sure so i'm gonna combine two things
okay the first
is so i would feel the
the you can dissolve you can both
use meditation to dissolve and to
understand the jealousy
third eye is not going to be about
dissolving third eye is going to be
about understanding
okay so what i would do is put yourself
into a particular meditative state
that is cultivated by a third eye
practice and then
generally direct your intent i don't
know if that makes sense to you or not
but you know when you get into a
meditative state
you're kind of there but not there
okay and then just let the jealousy come
and from that state experience the
jealousy
i know it's kind of hard to describe but
it's like this is hard to you just have
to do it
and then you'll kind of get a sense of
it so if you've been doing you've been
doing this
charging the laser beam practice yeah
okay can you breathe in and out through
your nose
yes can you tell which of your nostrils
is more open than the other
i think my left nostril okay go ahead
and check with a finger
or you write
yeah okay so i want you to sit up
straight
okay so when you do the charging the
laser beam practice
what do you feel
like once i'm there where i'm kind of
feeling the sensation in my forehead
yeah what does the sensation feel like
it's like a tingling
pretty much just like a tingling in my
forehead feels like very exaggerated
feeling like almost a bump or something
like there's just
yeah a lot of okay so that's good
so you're awakening your third eye which
is great
brought it out there so now what i'm
going to teach you to do is just clean
out
that area so that it it'll facilitate
the growing okay okay
so it's not going to directly help but
it'll help you a little bit
and then as your third eye as you grow
in your third eye practice
you'll understand your jealousy it'll
sort it out
don't worry about it okay so i want you
to close your eyes
it's actually a pretty simple practice
and i want you to feel that
cool air in your open nostril
can you feel the coldness of the air hmm
yeah and where do you feel it
it's like right at the base of the
nostrils okay so eyes closed
and now i want you to focus sort of on
the middle of your nose
sort of the bridge of your nose and try
to feel the coldness there
can you feel it
and now i want you to follow that
coldness all the way up
to your third eye the center of your
forehead
can you feel the coolness there
yeah so what i want you to do is just
sort of imagine
that you're cleaning out that area
with that breath so that cool air
travels
up
and then out
and we'll do this for about 30 to 60
seconds
just follow each breath as it travels
up into your the middle of your forehead
if you get distracted just return to
that sensation of coolness in your
forehead
that fresh air kind of traveling in
cleaning it out
and now we're gonna go to uh our
charging the laser beam practice
so take your right hand your middle
finger
and hover it above the point
and just focus on the sensation you want
to be about
a quarter inch to half an inch away from
your skin
you can move closer and just focus on
the sensation of your forehead
we'll do this for about a minute or two
go ahead and let your hand rest and
continue focusing on the sensation
you feeling it yeah
now we're going to go to the third phase
of the practice
so what i want you to do is take your
eyes
and with your lids closed look towards
that point on your forehead where you
feel the sensation
so you're almost going to be looking up
and cross side
drive your attention towards your third
eye
you may feel a strain or a dizziness
so you need to relax your eyes
and then return again
don't hold it too long
drive your attention towards that point
with your vision
you can hold the gaze for about five to
ten seconds at a time and then relax
now let yourself relax
good
bask in the person that you are
and now notice how foreign
jealousy may feel
and if it arises for you let it arise
when you're ready go ahead and open your
eyes
hello hey man how you feeling
i feel very good what was it like when
you
were looking cross-eyed at
the third eye i'd never done that part
it felt it didn't really feel dizzying
it just felt like i was focusing extra
hard
and i found that that tranquil spot
just like pure joy
yes great fantastic
pure joy and connected is ultimately you
know you can't be doing it wrong if
that's how you feel
but um yeah so so focusing extra hard
is the point so another thing that you
guys should understand is you all should
not do that third part
unless you've been doing the other parts
first
so in your case uh it doesn't surprise
me
ryan that you've been doing third eye
meditation and now you can
you can push harder towards it
so should i be doing that that eye thing
like you do it in phases like first
get like the sensation and then start
looking up there yep
you can do it in that sequence so you
can do the should be practice first
which is breathing into it and then out
and then
using the charging of the laser beam and
then then
you can i mean the charging laser beam
you actually you may not even need to do
that anymore at all
yeah um and and then you can direct your
attention with your gaze
but that too you want to be careful you
don't want to strain your eyes or
anything like that
it's just i don't know how to describe
it but for me it feels like
you know i'm turning the hose on high
and then i turn it down to low
does that make sense uh not entirely
okay
i mean yeah don't worry about it
okay it's just different different
explanations for
i mean someone in chat came up with
charging the laser beam
which i think is actually a pretty good
description of what it feels like
that's how it feels yeah and so you know
different words for these strange
sensations that we don't know how to
describe
but overall
um thanks for coming on man thank you
for having me
yeah of course i've been following since
um i saw reckful's video first and
your videos have done a lot for me and
i'm sure you're helping a lot of people
so thank you very much for having me on
and you definitely helped me
cool good luck to you man and thank you
and you know i i i'm
hopeful about this next phase i think
you can handle it but i don't think it's
going to be easy it's going to be hard
in a subtle way
yeah that makes sense definitely yeah so
good luck to you dude
thank you and congrats on the world
record that blows my mind
thank you very much take care man have a
good one
bye-bye okay
so this is a little bit different